---
title   : "The death and life of 'operative' history"
subtitle: "Dialogues between historiography and design theory in contemporary Italy"
date    : "EAHN 2020"
author  : "Pedro Paulo Palazzo[^aff]"
affiliation: >
  Visiting scholar at the Università degli Studi di
  Roma « Tor Vergata » department of Civil and Computer
  Engineering and at the University of Coimbra Centre for Social Studies
  in 2019--2020. Assistant professor at the University of Brasilia
  school of Architecture and
  Urbanism.
abstract: |
  The Italian debates of the post-war era regarding the possibility of
  an 'operative' history of architecture, revolving around Manfredo
  Tafuri's critique of Saverio Muratori's method of procedural typology
  and his ambiguous stance on Aldo Rossi's later work, provide the
  theoretical background for a present-day 'Italian school' of
  typo-morphology. This 'school' is split between the modernist
  disciples of Muratori and the younger traditionalists, loosely
  inspired by Rossi. The points of agreement and of disagreement within
  this school point to a continued reevaluation of Tafuri's call for a
  critical and autonomous historiography, although the theoretical
  pitfalls of giving an operative role to historical knowledge are ever
  present.

  **Keywords:** Theory of architectural history, Italian school of
  procedural typology, New classicism, Manfredo Tafuri, Aldo Rossi
keywords:
  - Theory of architectural history
  - Italian school of procedural typology
  - New classicism
  - Manfredo Tafuri
  - Aldo Rossi
description: |
  Abstract
  ========

  Manfredo Tafuri's caveats regarding 'operative criticism' as a
  progressive solution to the lack of political efficacy and of
  scholarly rigour in the militant architectural history of the
  mid-twentieth century had, in his time, little following.
  Architectural historians sought greater professional specialisation
  not 'operativeness,' whereas architectural theorists, by the late
  1970s, were beginning to embrace the 'linguistic turn' and its
  nihilistic view of historical knowledge.

  In the ever-widening split that has characterised the global
  scholarship of architecture ever since, Italy nonetheless gave rise to
  a network of typo-morphological studies founded upon both rigorous
  historiography and a coherent theory underpinning the operative use of
  this historical knowledge in architectural design. This 'school'---for
  want of a better word---is perhaps unique, this paper argues, in that
  it defines a clear scope of objects and methods pertaining to the
  disciplinary field of architecture as a whole, thus providing a
  unified framework for both historiography and design.

  Yet, the Italian 'school' of typo-morphological history and theory is
  diverse, exposing rifts between traditionalists and modernists. The
  former are tributary of Aldo Rossi's postmodernist formal
  relationships derived from a concept of 'collective memory,' whereas
  the latter adopt Saverio Muratori's 'procedural typology' as a tool
  for generating abstract spatial relationships. Historians,
  theoreticians, and designers are now moving on from the long-standing
  primacy of Medieval and Renaissance studies, and of the post-war
  reconstructions of Venice and Rome. This paper focuses on recent
  studies in nineteenth century architecture as well as new projects in
  the Po river plains cities---Alessandria, Parma, Bologna---that
  clarify these theoretical conflicts yet show the way forward for
  'operative' historiography and typological theory in the Italian
  school.
suppress-bibliography  : true
reference-section-title: 'References'
notes-after-punctuation: true
number-sections        : false
lang                   : en-GB
xnos-caption-separator : colon
xnos-cleveref          : true
xnos-capitalise        : true
xnos-number-by-section : false
---

![Gianfranco Caniggia. Typological analysis plate of the City of Como, 1963.
[@caniggia:1984lettura]](como-ii.png)

The struggle for rigour in architectural scholarship in post-war Italy
resulted in an engaging and diverse body of argumentative and exemplary
writings by well-known authors such as Saverio Muratori (1910--1973),
Aldo Rossi (1931--1997), and Manfredo Tafuri (1935--1994). Their often
conflicting positions on the craft of architectural history, its
relationship to design practice, and the establishment of disciplinary
parameters for either history or design, set the foundational arguments
for much of the international debate around these themes.

The validity of extracting 'operative' knowledge from history for use in
architectural and urban practice is one among many debates in which
these architects engaged [@purini:2013saverio, 62]. This controversy is
expressed most clearly in their differing attitudes towards typology as
either an art historical device or a theory of the architectural
planning process.

The Italian universe of typological studies is probably best known
through Aldo Rossi's idiosyncratic definition of the concept, in *The
Architecture of the City,* as the study of 'constants' underlying urban
and architectural 'facts' and discernible in them
[@rossi:2006architettura, 33]. Saverio Muratori's contribution, on the
other hand, is restricted to the technical domain of urban morphology
[@cataldi:2013debito, 14], to a great extent due to his ostracism from
the mainstream critical panorama, brought about by his ideological
condemnation at the hands of Bruno Zevi and Manfredo Tafuri
[@pigafetta:1990saverio, 29]. Tafuri himself towers tall as one of the
most acclaimed architectural historians of the post--1968 era, not the
least for his combative---though at times inconsistent---argument for
the critical autonomy of architectural history outside the professional
scope of the architectural discipline [@tafuri:1988teorie, 268].

Nowadays, however, and especially outside Italy, the critical
perspectives around these three architects are mostly cut off from one
another, being concerned with specific subfields in research and
practice, the scopes of which have been increasingly delimited to
reflect their respective methodological and ideological *partis pris.*
This segmentation of theories and scholarship influenced by Muratori,
Rossi, and Tafuri is not only a misrepresentation of their frequent
engagement with one another's theories [As evidenced by
@moschini:2013saverio; @petruccioli:1998exoteric; @lobsinger:2006new59;
@murro:2019storia]; it also obscures the claim put forward by each one
of them to a systematic representation of and agency on the urban
environment.

The confrontation of Tafuri's critical underpinnings for an autonomous
and critical history of architecture [@biraghi:2005progetto] with
Muratori's and Rossi's methods for the operative leveraging of
historical research in design exposes the overarching conflicts in world
view among them, of course, but beneath these differences certain
fundamental affinities show through, evidencing how they partake in the
major intellectual and political themes of their age. These affinities
have not, however, been carried on by their disciples and interpreters
as clearly as their differences. This has caused Muratori's, Rossi's,
and Tafuri's work to become somewhat abstract and disconnected from the
role they all expected their critique to play in the transformation of
urban planning [@tafuri:1980sfera, 24]. In other words, what they have
in common is they intended not so much to propose a general theory of
architectural form---for Muratori was sceptical of formal rules, Rossi
was sceptical of generalisations, and Tafuri was sceptical of
theorising---, but rather to look at the contemporary city as a
*process* to be acted upon politically and technically
[@muratori:1959studiIX, 132].

In light of their common goal of contributing critically to processes
rather than objects, one can begin to draw a clearer picture of their
affinities and conflicts, putting the acrid debates of the 1960s and 70s
in the long-term perspective of how their legacies have been, and could
be, carried on throughout the evolving ideological configurations of the
architectural profession. To this end, the study of the direct 'lineage'
of the second and third generation of Muratori's disciples
[@cataldi:2002saverio6], as well as of other practitioners and scholars
influenced by Rossi's poetics of the city and by Tafuri's critical
historiography, offers an overview of what rigorous architectural
scholarship can look like in the present day. This loosely defined group
of architects may be, for starters, grouped in an 'Italian school of
typology' of sorts.

This 'school' shall be defined, initially, by the shared scope of
objects and methods pertaining to the architectural discipline, reaching
back to the superimposition of idealist philosophy and socialist
politics that was pervasive in post-war Italian architectural circles
[@leach:2007manfredo, 47]. This disciplinary framing understands
architecture to be not a specific set of objects, real or potential, but
a process of bringing about change in the urban fabric; conversely,
history is not envisaged as a coherent narrative to be 'found', but as a
collection of fragments of which to make sense in a piecemeal fashion
[@zevi:1974architettura, 55].

On top of this common ground, providing a shared understanding of the
profession's role in the contemporary world, a second level of analysis
reveals an implicit awareness of the conflicts between historiographic
critique, ever bent on scattering and reassembling the fragments in
infinite ways [@tafuri:1977storico, 17], and operative synthesis,
demanding agreement, if limited and provisional, on reconstructed
'memories' of the urban process to be acted upon critically
[@stoppani:2010lhistoire, 220].

The cracks developing from these conflicts become rifts, on a third
level, between the 'modernist' disciples of Muratori
[@caniggia:1984introduzione, 12]---among them Gianfranco Caniggia, Gian
Luigi Maffei, Giancarlo Cataldi, and Giuseppe Strappa---and the
'traditionalists' [@rosponi:2004new] or 'new classicists'
[@papadakis:1990new]---such as Pier Carlo Bontempi, Gabriele
Tagliaventi, and Cristiano Rosponi---loosely inspired by the figurative
character of Rossi's later work. This cleaving of the 'Italian school'
hinges on the decomposition of the urban 'organism', in the work of
living practitioners, according to diverging hierarchies of abstract and
figurative elements [An example of conflicting hierarchies is patent in
the ancillary role ascribed to construction and detailing in
@caniggia:1987progetto]. This conflict exposes conceptual weaknesses in
the theories supporting typological design, in terms of the choices
practitioners make when appropriating and making sense of urban
fragments.

Thus, the analysis turns back for a final look at how critical
historiography addresses the shortcomings of operativity. By looking at
the interaction of historical scholarship and design practice in the
work of architects who combine both activities [See, for example,
@tagliaventi:2007manuale; @tagliaventi:2000tecniche], the theoretical
assumptions linking both fields become clear. The typological
contradictions between the 'historic city' strictly
defined---preindustrial urbanism [@caniggia:2008lettura, 23]---and the
urban fabric of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
appears as an unresolved conflict  in the methods and judgements of
'modernists' from the Muratorian school [@strappa:1989tradizione] and of
traditionalists alike [@tagliaventi:2006european18].

<!--
   -
   -Architecture as process, history as fragments
   -=============================================
   -
   -Concepts and methods
   ---------------------
   -
   -- 2 kinds of historicism: Avant-garde teleology of history and Crocean
   -  'philosophy as history';
   -- Drops stylistic analysis in favour of 'elective affinities' of
   -  artists and works with their contemporary context;
   -- 'Metodologia dell'elenco' in both historiography and design;
   -- Primacy of historical knowledge over normative theory, the latter
   -  always derived from the former, when it is admitted.
   -
   -
   -Domain of architecture
   -----------------------
   -
   -- Building a structure and building the city as recursive processes;
   -- Abandon view of city and territory as artefacts in favour of
   -  processes;
   -- Extant city as main object, infill as main operation.
   -
   -
   -Historicist criticism and operative synthesis
   -=============================================
   -
   -Tools of architectural historiography
   --------------------------------------
   -
   -- History vs. memory
   -
   -
   -Memory and the critical consciousness
   --------------------------------------
   -
   -- On the ability of criticism to leverage the embodied knowledge of
   -  spontaneous consciousness.
   -
   -
   -Typology, abstraction, and figuration
   -=====================================
   -
   -Typology and its conflicts
   ---------------------------
   -
   -- Does 'type' exist?
   -- Scales of typology: space, structure, ornament;
   -- Typological process is a form of historicism.
   -
   -
   -Traditionalism in Process
   --------------------------
   -
   -- From 'morality' to tangible objects;
   -
   -
   -Operativeness in historical perspective
   -=======================================
   -
   -- Intrahistory and casticism;
   -- Present reality is at the same time singular (yet apt to be
   -  contaminated by the artefacts of memory) and a collapsed state of
   -  all previous history.
   -
   -- The present as a *result* of the past is an illusion crafted by
   -  collective memory, because 'the present' is itself an identity
   -  crafted in the present;
   -- The present as *different* from the past is an illusion crafted by
   -  (teleological) historicism, because 'the past' ultimately does not
   -  exist;
   -- Both are therefore inadequate justifications for practice because
   -  they focus on the *movement* from past to present, which is not
   -  experienced but is a mental construct.
   -
   -- The present, collapsed state of the city is all we have;
   -- The role of history is to *pull apart* this collapsed state and
   -  to make *discrete* images of its moments in time;
   -- The role of design is to *synthesise* this collapsed state and
   -  to make *the whole* coherent and imageable at a single point of
   -  intervention.
   -
   -
   -Conclusion
   -==========
   -
   -
   -References
   -==========
   -
   -::: {#refs}
   -:::
   -->

[^aff]: Visiting scholar at the Università degli Studi di Roma « Tor
  Vergata » department of Civil and Computer Engineering and at the
  University of Coimbra Centre for Social Studies in 2019--2020. Assistant
  professor at the University of Brasilia school of Architecture and
  Urbanism.

