---
title   : "The Death and Life of Operative History"
subtitle: "Dialogues Between Historiography and Design Theory in Contemporary Italy"
date    : "EAHN 2021 session Split Cultures/New Dialogues: Research in Architectural History and Theory"
author  : "Pedro P. Palazzo"
affiliation: >
  Associate professor at the University of Brasilia school of
  Architecture and Urbanism.
description: >
  The Italian debates of the post-war era regarding the possibility of
  an 'operative' history of architecture revolved around Manfredo
  Tafuri's critique of Saverio Muratori's method of procedural typology
  and his ambiguous stance on Aldo Rossi's later work. They provide the
  theoretical background for a present-day 'Italian school' of
  typo-morphology. This 'school' is split between the modernist
  disciples of Muratori and the younger traditionalists, loosely
  inspired by Rossi. The points of agreement and of disagreement within
  this school point to a continued reevaluation of Tafuri's call for a
  critical and autonomous historiography, although the theoretical
  pitfalls of giving an operative role to historical knowledge are ever
  present.
keywords:
  - Theory of architectural history
  - Italian school of procedural typology
  - New classicism
  - Manfredo Tafuri
  - Aldo Rossi
layout                 : page
suppress-bibliography  : true
notes-after-punctuation: true
number-sections        : false
lang                   : en-GB
---

## Abstract ##

The Italian debates of the post-war era regarding the possibility of
an 'operative' history of architecture revolved around Manfredo
Tafuri's critique of Saverio Muratori's method of procedural typology
and his ambiguous stance on Aldo Rossi's later work. They provide the
theoretical background for a present-day 'Italian school' of
typo-morphology. This 'school' is split between the modernist
disciples of Muratori and the younger traditionalists, loosely
inspired by Rossi. The points of agreement and of disagreement within
this school point to a continued reevaluation of Tafuri's call for a
critical and autonomous historiography, although the theoretical
pitfalls of giving an operative role to historical knowledge are ever
present.

## Keywords ##

Theory of architectural history, Italian school of procedural
typology, New classicism, Manfredo Tafuri, Aldo Rossi.

# Introduction #

The struggle for rigour in architectural scholarship in post-war Italy
resulted in an engaging and diverse body of argumentative and exemplary
writings by well-known authors such as Saverio Muratori (@fig:muratori),
Aldo Rossi (@fig:rossi), and Manfredo Tafuri (@fig:tafuri). Their often
conflicting positions on the craft of architectural history, its
relationship to design practice, and the establishment of disciplinary
parameters for either history or design, set the foundational arguments
for much of the international debate around these themes.
The validity of extracting 'operative' knowledge from history for use in
architectural and urban practice is one among many debates in which
these architects engaged. This controversy is
expressed most clearly in their differing attitudes towards typology as
either an art historical device or a theory of the architectural
planning process.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: {.columns}
::: {.column width=33%}
![Saverio Muratori (1910--1973)](https://i.pinimg.com/originals/d2/c8/56/d2c856eb183a433688b5f19ebefd733a.jpg){#fig:muratori}
:::
::: {.column width=33%}
![Aldo Rossi (1931--1997). Fondazione Aldo Rossi](https://i.pinimg.com/originals/e9/21/80/e92180050a52d1d0f101337cc8750ecd.jpg){#fig:rossi}
:::
::: {.column width=33%}
![Manfredo Tafuri (1935--1994)](https://i.pinimg.com/originals/2d/bc/06/2dbc06b5e009fc67dc61a13fc368ff4c.jpg){#fig:tafuri}
:::
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

The Italian universe of typological studies is probably best known
from Aldo Rossi's idiosyncratic definition of the concept, in *The
Architecture of the City,* as the study of 'constants' underlying urban
and architectural 'facts' and discernible in them
[@rossi:1995larchitettura, 33]. Saverio Muratori's contribution, on the
other hand, was restricted to the technical domain of urban morphology
[@cataldi:2013debito, 14]. Tafuri himself towers tall as one of the
most acclaimed architectural historians of the post--1968 era, not the
least for his combative argument in favour of
critical autonomy of architectural history [@tafuri:1988teorie, 268].
Nowadays, however, and especially outside Italy, the critical
perspectives around these three architects are mostly cut off from one
another, being concerned with specific subfields in research and
practice. Their respective scopes have been increasingly delimited to
reflect their respective methodological and ideological *partis pris.*
This segmentation of theories and scholarship derived from Muratori,
Rossi, and Tafuri is not only a misrepresentation of their frequent
engagement with one another's theories [As evidenced by
@moschini:2013saverio; @petruccioli:1998exoteric; @lobsinger:2006new59;
@murro:2019storia]; it also obscures the claim put forward by each one
of them to a systematic representation of and agency on the urban
environment.

These claims unfolded throughout their careers and legacies on four
successive levels I shall develop in this paper. At first, Muratori,
Rossi, and Tafuri all grappled with the fragmented nature of historical
evidence and the conflicting ways by which they sought to explain
architecture as a process. Their various responses to this problem led
to the second level, in which Tafuri's strictly critical stance breaks
away from the operative methods laid out by Muratori and Rossi. In the
third level, Muratori's legacy of an all-encompassing theory of urban
succession, carried on by his disciples, came to be at odds with the
later work of Rossi, increasingly interested in local and visual
references over abstract theories. Finally, in the fourth level I will
look at a few living architects who have carried on the operative
typologies of both Muratori and Rossi.

# Architecture as process, history as fragments #

Let us start out with the scope of
objects and methods pertaining to the architectural discipline, reaching
back to the superimposition of Idealist philosophy and socialist
politics that was pervasive in post-war Italian architectural circles
[@leach:2007manfredo, 47]. This disciplinary framing understood
architecture to be not a specific set of objects, real or potential, but
a process of bringing about change in the urban fabric. Conversely,
history was not envisaged as a coherent narrative to be 'found', but as
a collection of fragments to make sense of in a piecemeal fashion.
The 'methodology of collecting' fragments as an analogy for the study of
architectural history had been made explicit by Bruno Zevi as early as
1950 [@zevi:1974architettura, 55]. However, Zevi refused to relate this
collection of fragments within any sort of physical context; the only
process he would admit of was the emergence of the 'awareness of making
architecture' itself [@zevi:1965architettura1, col. 616-7], that is, the
rise of creative freedom, following Benedetto Croce's aesthetic theory
[@croce:1947concetto, 194]. Zevi's 'operative critique' of architecture
predicated on ever growing artistic originality failed, however, to
respond to the urgent threat to historic centres posed by post-war
development.

Throughout the 1950s, Muratori developed another Idealist theory in
response to this threat to the historic city. Against Zevi's concept of
'operative critique', he proposed an 'operative history' in which
the reality of the city as a piecemeal accumulation of interventions
paradoxically proved its nature to be that of a coherent organism.
Thus, even though historical and archaeological evidence would always be
fragmentary, the coherent process of becoming that is the built
environment could be understood through evidence based synthetic judgment
[@muratori:1959studiIX, 111-2]. Aldo Rossi later picked up where Muratori's
1959 article left off. In his 1966 book *The Architecture of the City*,
Rossi thus portrayed the urban phenomenon as the present state of a
continuous, yet heterogeneous, process of grafting changes onto a fabric
that persists across the ages. Despite the incoherence of this 'creation
born out of numerous and diverse moments of formation', the city can
still, at any one moment, be grasped as 'a unit in its whole', because
'the possibility of reading the city in continuity lies in its
pre-eminent formal and spatial character' [@rossi:1995larchitettura, 72].

Tafuri, a former student of both Muratori's and Zevi's, took issue with
both of their brands of Idealism in his 1968 book, *Theories and History
of Architecture*. To approach the concept of history as a collection of
fragments, he used a Marxist lens predicating a clear-cut separation
between the production of the built environment and its historiographic
critique [@tafuri:1988teorie, 266]. Ostensibly, this was a plea for an
architectural history endowed with 'positive skills' to counteract vapid
theorizing [@tafuri:1991introduzione, 8]. In practice, it stemmed from
his Marxist belief that the *practice* of architecture was, by the late
twentieth century, well on its way to dissolving in the undifferentiated
scope of 'planning' [@tafuri:1980sfera, 25]. Architecture, in Tafuri's
view, became the stuff of history much in the same way Hegel had
proclaimed Art belonged to the past [@hegel:1986aesthetik1, 25].

Muratori's 'operative history' and Tafuri's 'critical history' both
looked at the problem of the historical fragment as the starting point
for a discussion of the built environment in a process of becoming, but
they looked at it from opposite ends. Muratori took the fragments that
made up the built environment as instances of *a priori* types, then
sought to explain the overall coherence of the historic city as an
outcome of the typological process [@muratori:1959studiIX, 103]. To
Tafuri, on the other hand, it is the nature of the historical process
that was given *a priori*: the deterministic advance of capitalist
technocracy since the early Renaissance [@tafuri:1988teorie, 18]. The
historian's task was then to fit, provisionally, the fragments of
architecture's increasingly dead body onto an ever-changing picture of
this advance [@tafuri:1977storico, 17].

# Historiographic critique and operative synthesis #

The difference between Muratori's and Tafuri's treatment of the
historical process stemmed from their different philosophies of reality.
In the Idealist theory developed by Muratori, the historic territory and
its reconstructed past had real, if not immediately tangible, existence
[@muratori:1978metodologia]. Tafuri's dialectic, on the other hand,
handled the 'perpetual critique' of historical fragments
[@tafuri:1980sfera, 4] as a way of exorcizing, so to speak, the very
existence of a tangible reality.

Tafuri wielded a historiographic 'scalpel' to 'pry open the compactness
of historical constructs, problematize them, and prevent them from
presenting themselves as "truths"' [@tafuri:1977storico, 17]. Exposing
all ideology as contradictory enabled him to produce sophisticated
analyses of Renaissance architectural theory [@stoppani:2010lhistoire,
239]. Yet, when the only tool one wields is critique, everything ends up
looking like a crisis. Tafuri's ideal contemporary architect was,
therefore, perennially locked into this state of crisis: either a
planner not designer, who would 'accept the transitional (and therefore
ambiguous) role played nowadays by a dismembered and multifarious
discipline' [@tafuri:1980sfera, 25], or a destroyer of conventional
meaning such as the younger Aldo Rossi, who took the existing city 'as a
mere pretext' and let architecture 'hang dangerously in the balance: its
reality, never denied outright, but mischievously mingled with the
unreal' [@tafuri:2002storia, 170].

In contrast to Tafuri's argument for a permanent state of crisis
[@biraghi:2005progetto], Muratori and Rossi sought to overcome the crisis of
modernity, which is ultimately a disjunction between what society values
and what it makes. This crisis, as described by Muratori, lay in the
social desire to preserve the coherence of traditional territories in an
age when the 'spontaneous' and incremental practice that hand given rise
to them was being lost to the 'self-conscious' and destructive practices
of modern architecture [@muratori:1967civilta, 24]. To this end, the
processes that gave rise to the mature traditional city ought not be
seen merely as products of their (past) ages. Rather, they were
intrinsically legitimate and necessary means of carrying on the
city-building process, *because* the city was by definition the outcome
of such processes---and departing from them would entail building
anything *but* a real city [@moschini:2013saverio, 176]. In turn,
Muratori saw the crafting of a historical narrative as analogous to the
process of city-building, inasmuch as either is only legitimate when it
convincingly presents the structural reality of the historical process
[@muratori:1959studiIX, 112].

The tension between the fragmentary nature of the city and its resulting
coherence was, to Rossi, the embodiment of its physical 'memory', made
possible by Marcel Poëte's law of persistence in plan.
Such persistence is driven, primarily, by embodied memory.
This refers to those 'urban facts' that hold back the continuous process
of urban transformation: monumental architecture at one end, and the
enduring pattern of land subdivision and ownership at the other
[@rossi:1995larchitettura]. When these factors are not at play, as in
greenfield projects, the physical urban memory must then be replicated
by means of reconstructed classifications present in human memory. Both
Muratori and Rossi thus claimed identity between the synthetic
reconstruction of the process that has brought about the historic city
as it exists and a normative theory of how best to build upon this
process. For both Muratori and Rossi, the concept of type was central to
this unified operation that both describes and directs city-building.

# Typology, abstraction, and figuration #

The concept of typology as a descriptive device in architectural history
has been asserted by authors with a wide range of theoretical
allegiances, from Argan and Moudon to Corona Martínez and Panerai
[@argan:1966tipologia14; @moudon:1994getting; @corona:2009ensayo;
@panerai:2012analyse]. However, its legitimacy as a mediation between
the existing city (or a tradition more generally and abstractly
understood) and contemporary design has been much more controversial;
Moneo even claimed it would be intellectually impossible for
contemporary architects to put themselves in the typological mindset
[@moneo:1978typology]. Furthermore, Tafuri's put-down of Muratori's
method had a point: if typology's aim was to overcome the crisis of
modern development by building upon the process of becoming of the
actual city, why was the breakdown of traditions itself not accepted as
a legitimate part of this process? Muratori's outright rejection of this
modern breakdown was no different, Tafuri argued, from the modernist
rejection of tradition [@tafuri:2002storia, 78].

To complicate matters further, Muratori's most prominent disciple,
Gianfranco Caniggia (1933--87), subscribed quite explicitly to the
modernist denunciation of eclecticism as inauthentic and commended the
'noble aspirations' of the Modern movement [@caniggia:2008lettura, 24-5].
Muratori's synthesis of an integral fabric of reality to be recomposed
by contextual design was thus replaced with an analytical attitude that
tried to isolate the 'structural' components of urban form while
throwing out the 'recycling of forms cherry picked from the past'
[@caniggia:1984moderno, 77]. This compromise nevertheless paid off
politically, as Caniggia earned Tafuri's respect [@tafuri:2002storia,
80] and Caniggia's own disciples have achieved a prestigious standing in
today's scholarly field of urban morphology [@cataldi:2002saverio6].
Since the last decade of the twentieth century, this 'Italian school of
typology' has turned into a continuum ranging from strict adherents of
Caniggia's 'modern' identity---Gian Luigi Maffei and Nicola Marzot
[@marzot:2002study6]---to scholars studying eclectic planning as a
legitimate step in the typological process---Giuseppe Strappa
[@caniggia:1989permanenze]---to 'soft' traditionalists---Paolo Maretto
and Giancarlo Cataldi [@maretto:1989verita; @cataldi:1989introduzione].

A rift remained, nevertheless, between this academically minded group
and another circle of architects that formed under the influence of Aldo
Rossi's later work. Starting with the 1979 Teatro del Mondo project in
the Venice Biennale, Rossi drifted towards a more figurative take on
memory. The scandal generated by this project overshadowed Rossi's
consistent stream of exploration into the use of classical details and
the more complete reconstruction of a traditionalist idiom in his later
works. Though Rossi wrote little from the mid 1970s on, his designs seem
to have done away with the notion he previously held, that 'crisis' and
a fragmented consciousness were the inescapable conditions of modernity.
Rossi's work, even considering his written works, never achieved the all
encompassing rules and procedures of the Muratorian school.
Rossi claimed to leverage 'memory' as the current state of the awareness
of history in any given context. Because memory is fragmentary, the
design resulting from this operation of memory is itself a fragment. At
first, the incomplete nature of memory was made palpable through formal
abstraction and lack of detailing; later, Rossi incorporates figurative
ornament (classical or postmodern). The abstract identity carried
through memory became increasingly supported by figurative elements in
Rossi's later works, setting him firmly apart from the Muratorian
school.

Rossi's example led a younger generation of 'traditionalists'
[@rosponi:2004new] or 'new classicists' [@papadakis:1990new]---such as
Pier Carlo Bontempi and Gabriele Tagliaventi---to break away from the
cautious abstraction of the Muratorian school. This movement also
claimed adherence to a form of typology, in this case the 'nameable
objects' put forward by Léon Krier [@krier:2009architecture, 29] and
definite, recognizable urban spaces as formulated by Rob Krier
[@krier:1991urban, 17]. Their work is outwardly more reminiscent of
Italian vernacular and classical traditions than the abstract practice
of the Muratorian planners, but another crucial difference shows through
on closer inspection. These new traditionalists traded Muratori's
integral recomposition of the historic settlement patterns for an uneasy
compromise with mainstream real estate development practices as well as
with standard planning regulations. This has given them a larger
footprint in the actual built environment, but it came at the cost of
debasing the underlying process of traditional typologies. This is not
an unconscious distortion, either. Tagliaventi, the most scholarly
minded among these new traditionalists, has claimed explicit affiliation
to the early twentieth century 'garden city' movement as a workable
compromise between modern planning practices and traditional urban
environments [@tagliaventi:1988alla]. Moreover, he is wary of Tafuri's
vision of architectural history as entirely detached from the profession
of architecture. Tagliaventi's historical research is characterized by a
fiercely disciplinary approach focusing on the 'tools of the
trade'---compositional devices, materials, techniques, and
manufacturing. His *Tecniche e tecnologie dell'architettura fra
eclettismo e storicismo* reads less like Tafuri's books---anthologies
permeated by the single purpose of discussing capitalist development
since the Renaissance---and more like Rossi's *Architecture of the
City*: a collection of fragments building up to an underlying 'typology'
of recurring practices and processes of disciplinary decision-making
[@tagliaventi:2000tecniche].

# Conclusion: operativity in historical perspective #

Now, the analysis turns back for a final look at how critical
historiography addressed the shortcomings of operativity. By looking at
the interaction of historical scholarship and design practice in the
work of architects who combine both activities, the theoretical
assumptions linking both fields become clear. The typological
contradictions between the 'historic city' strictly
defined---pre-industrial urbanism---and the urban fabric of the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries appears as an unresolved
conflict  in the methods and judgements of 'modernists' from the
Muratorian school and of traditionalists alike. In Tafuri's overarching
critical scheme, laid out as early as 1968, the distinctions in form and
scale between the pre-industrial and post-industrial built environments
seemed inconsequential: both were part of a continuous process of
developing capitalism, which was more crucially leading to the end of
architecture as an effective discipline.

It is true that Tafuri's initial enmity towards the 'operative history'
developed by Muratori softened in the 1980s, when the scholarly
contributions of planning typology became clear. Nevertheless, the
separation between these two methods evidences a fundamental rift in
scholarship and practice. History, as understood by Tafuri, is bounded
by the fragmentary evidence in sources, and consists of continuous
rearrangements of these fragments. This rearrangement is guided by an *a
priori* theory of historical process, which in Tafuri's programme is the
critique of capitalist development. Muratorian planning typology, on the
other hand, should be called, more properly, a form of archaeology of
the built environment. It is concerned with reconstructing the
invisible, structural process between the extant fragments, and does so
by assuming *a priori* that these fragments must be instances of types.

Aldo Rossi took typology into a terrain that had a less rigorous method.
This enabled him and his followers to develop a variety of
experimentations along a spectrum ranging from extremely abstract forms
celebrating the fragmentary remnants of the traditional city, to
extremely figurative renderings of classical forms exploring ways of
completing the fragmentary state of the built environment. This variety
has resulted in Rossi's work and legacy being sometimes discounted as
inconsistent, superficial, or conservative. This approach all but
vanished from academic debates in the twenty-first century, even as it
has gained a growing foothold in the development market.

All three stances, Tafuri's historical critique, Muratori's operative
history, and Rossi's free-form typology, made relevant points about the
nature of reality in architecture and its history. In a sense, Tafuri's
implicit foundational belief that the past does not *exist* in reality
is true: all we have at hand is the whole of surviving fragments of
history collapsed onto the present; ascribing some of these fragments to
'the present' or 'the past' is an operation of memory and critique,
however ingrained certain attributions must be for any sort of discourse
to be effective. On the other hand, this collapsed state of all of
history onto the present is precisely what grants legitimacy to
Muratori's normative claim that the existing city be the starting point
of new construction. The role of history is indeed to pull apart this
collapsed state into discrete images of aspects or moments in a virtual
reconstruction of time; conversely, the role of design is to synthesize
this collapsed state by making a fractured accumulation of instances
whole and imageable at a single point of intervention.

